Configurable internal-only machine types (#3313)
kyma-project/kyma-environment-broker: notable-changes-to-release/notable-change.md

<!--{"metadata":{"requirement":"RECOMMENDED","type":"INTERNAL","category":"CONFIGURATION"}}-->

# KEB: Internal-Only Machine Types

> ### Note: 

> > This change is recommended. Without configuring `internalOnlyMachines`, machine types intended for internal SAP use — such as GPU-equipped instances — remain accessible to external customers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> This change is recommended. Without configuring **internalOnlyMachines**, machine types intended for internal SAP use — such as GPU-equipped instances — remain accessible to external customers.
```

## What's Changed

> KEB now supports an `internalOnlyMachines` field in the plan configuration. Machine types listed there are blocked for external customers (requests carrying an external license type) but remain available to internal SAP users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
KEB now supports the **internalOnlyMachines** field in the plan configuration. The machine types listed there are blocked for requests from external customers (carrying an external license type) but remain available to internal SAP users.
```

Reviewer: I'm not sure of this one - pls verify. The intention is to connect the info in brackets with the sentence structure logically.

> The restriction applies to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The restriction applies to the following:
```

- The main machine type in a provisioning or update request.
- Machine types used in additional worker node pools.

If an external customer specifies a restricted machine type, the request is rejected with an error message that lists the restricted machine types and the worker pool names where they appear.

> At startup, KEB logs a warning for any `internalOnlyMachines` entry that is redundant (already covered by a shorter prefix) or unmatched (does not correspond to any machine in `regularMachines` or `additionalMachines`). These warnings are informational and do not prevent KEB from starting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At startup, KEB logs a warning for any **internalOnlyMachines** entry that is redundant (already covered by a shorter prefix) or unmatched (does not correspond to any machine in **regularMachines** or **additionalMachines**). These warnings are informational and do not prevent KEB from starting.
```

## Procedure

> Add `internalOnlyMachines` to the relevant plans in the plan configuration. Each entry is either a family prefix (matches all machine types starting with that string) or a fully-qualified machine type name (matches only that exact type).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add **internalOnlyMachines** to the relevant plans in the plan configuration. Each entry is either a family prefix (matches all machine types starting with that string) or a fully-qualified machine type name (matches only that exact type).
```

```yaml
plansConfiguration:
  aws:
    regularMachines:
      - "m6i.large"
      - "m6i.xlarge"
    additionalMachines:
      - "g6.xlarge"
      - "g6.2xlarge"
      - "g4dn.xlarge"
    internalOnlyMachines:
      - "g6"           # family prefix — restricts all g6.* sizes
      - "g4dn.xlarge"  # fully-qualified — restricts only this specific size
```

> See [Internal-Only Machine Types](https://github.com/kyma-project/kyma-environment-broker/blob/main/docs/contributor/03-73-internal-only-machines.md) for full configuration details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more configuration details, see [Internal-Only Machine Types](https://github.com/kyma-project/kyma-environment-broker/blob/main/docs/contributor/03-73-internal-only-machines.md).
```

## Post-Update Steps

> After updating the configuration:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After updating the configuration, perform the following steps:
```

> 1. **Check KEB startup logs for configuration warnings.** KEB logs a warning for each misconfigured `internalOnlyMachines` entry. Look for lines like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Check KEB startup logs for configuration warnings. KEB logs a warning for each misconfigured **internalOnlyMachines** entry. Look for lines similar to the following:
```

   - Redundant entry (already covered by a shorter prefix in the same list):
     ```
     internalOnlyMachines entry "g6.xlarge" is redundant in plan "aws" — already covered by prefix "g6"
     ```

>    - Unmatched entry (does not correspond to any machine in `regularMachines` or `additionalMachines`):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Unmatched entry (does not correspond to any machine in **regularMachines** or **additionalMachines**):
```

     ```
     internalOnlyMachines entry "g6.unknown" in plan "aws" does not match any machine type in regularMachines or additionalMachines
     ```

>    These warnings are informational — KEB continues to start — but they indicate entries that either have no effect or overlap with a prefix, and should be corrected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   These warnings are informational, and they don't prevent KEB from starting. They only indicate entries that either have no effect or overlap with a prefix and should be corrected.
```

> 2. **Verify request enforcement.** Confirm that external provisioning and update requests using the restricted machine types are rejected, and that internal requests continue to succeed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Verify request enforcement: Confirm that external provisioning and update requests using the restricted machine types are rejected, and that internal requests continue to succeed.
```
